Doc/c-api/perfmaps.rst, before:



.. highlight:: c

.. _perfmaps:

Support for Perf Maps
----------------------

On supported platforms (as of this writing, only Linux), the runtime can take
advantage of *perf map files* to make Python functions visible to an external
profiling tool (such as `perf <https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page>`_).
A running process may create a file in the `/tmp` directory, which contains entries
that can map a section of executable code to a name. This interface is described in the
`documentation of the Linux Perf tool <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/
kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/tools/perf/Documentation/jit-interface.txt>`_.

In Python, these helper APIs can be used by libraries and features that rely
on generating machine code on the fly.

.. c:function:: int PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init(void)
   Open the `/tmp/perf-$pid.map` file, unless it's already opened, and create
   a lock to ensure thread-safe writes to the file (provided the writes are
   done through :c:func:`PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry`). Normally, there's no need
   to call this explicitly, and it is safe to directly use :c:func:`PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry`
   in your code. If the state isn't already initialized, it will be created on
   the first call.
.. c:function:: int PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry(const void *code_addr, unsigned int code_size, const char *entry_name)
   Write one single entry to the `/tmp/perf-$pid.map` file. This function is
   thread safe. Here is what an example entry looks like::
      # address      size  name
      0x7f3529fcf759 b     py::bar:/run/t.py
   Extensions are encouraged to directly call this API when needed, instead of
   separately initializing the state by calling :c:func:`PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init`.
.. c:function:: int PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Fini(void)
   Close the perf map file, which was opened in `PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init`. This
   API is called by the runtime itself, during interpreter shut-down. In general,
   there shouldn't be a reason to explicitly call this, except to handle specific
   scenarios such as forking.

Commit message:

User error codes and fix 32-bit system issues
Summary:
Port the latest changes from the [perf-map C-API PR](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/103546/). This includes using error codes instead of exceptions to avoid the need to hold the GIL.

Additionally, there was an issue with Fedora on a 32-bit system that was fixed in this [PR](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/104811), so I also ported the fix.

Reviewed By: carljm

Differential Revision: D46041553

fbshipit-source-id: 6502189f489ca6cf11949ecd93c044e5ebe4fd2c

Doc/c-api/perfmaps.rst, after:

.. highlight:: c

.. _perfmaps:

Support for Perf Maps
----------------------

On supported platforms (as of this writing, only Linux), the runtime can take
advantage of *perf map files* to make Python functions visible to an external
profiling tool (such as `perf <https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page>`_).
A running process may create a file in the ``/tmp`` directory, which contains entries
that can map a section of executable code to a name. This interface is described in the
`documentation of the Linux Perf tool <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/
kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/tools/perf/Documentation/jit-interface.txt>`_.

In Python, these helper APIs can be used by libraries and features that rely
on generating machine code on the fly.

Note that holding the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) is not required for these APIs.

.. c:function:: int PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init(void)

   Open the ``/tmp/perf-$pid.map`` file, unless it's already opened, and create
   a lock to ensure thread-safe writes to the file (provided the writes are
   done through :c:func:`PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry`). Normally, there's no need
   to call this explicitly; just use :c:func:`PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry`
   and it will initialize the state on first call.

   Returns ``0`` on success, ``-1`` on failure to create/open the perf map file,
   or ``-2`` on failure to create a lock. Check ``errno`` for more information
   about the cause of a failure.

.. c:function:: int PyUnstable_WritePerfMapEntry(const void *code_addr, unsigned int code_size, const char *entry_name)

   Write one single entry to the ``/tmp/perf-$pid.map`` file. This function is
   thread safe. Here is what an example entry looks like::

      # address      size  name
      7f3529fcf759 b     py::bar:/run/t.py

   Will call :c:func:`PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init` before writing the entry, if
   the perf map file is not already opened. Returns ``0`` on success, or the
   same error codes as :c:func:`PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init` on failure.

.. c:function:: void PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Fini(void)

   Close the perf map file opened by :c:func:`PyUnstable_PerfMapState_Init`.
   This is called by the runtime itself during interpreter shut-down. In
   general, there shouldn't be a reason to explicitly call this, except to
   handle specific scenarios such as forking.
